# Runtime Testing

For Assignment 4 I tested the runtimes of Insertion Sort, 
Merge Sort, Bubble Sort, and Selection Sort.

## Methodology


To test these algorithms efficiently, I created a function
that could take a sorting algorithm as a parameter and 
output a list of doubles representing the various runtimes. 
I tested each algorithm on lists of size 10, 100, 1,000, 10,000, and
100,000 values, where each list was composed of random values between
1 and 100,000.

## Results and Conclusions

### Results 

The following results are generated by running the runtime calculating function (this can
be done by running the main function in Main.kt):

| Size   | Insertion Sort (s) | Merge Sort (s) | Bubble Sort (s) | Selection Sort (s) |
|--------|--------------------|----------------|-----------------|--------------------|
| 10     | 0.00100454         | 0.00008663     | 0.00002813      | 0.00003646         |
| 100    | 0.00046529         | 0.00040196     | 0.00056313      | 0.00032333         |
| 1000   | 0.01146667         | 0.00293479     | 0.01931775      | 0.00947267         |
| 10000  | 0.19265725         | 0.00866896     | 0.33485767      | 0.09442346         |
| 100000 | 15.24735696        | 0.08241979     | 44.75223833     | 5.97202792         |

### Analysis

In the table we can see that for small lists of integers (size 10 and 100), there is very little 
difference between the performances of each sorting algorithm. As the lists grow in size, the 
runtimes of the sorting algorithms diverge significantly. This is most evident when comparing algorithms
such as Merge Sort and Bubble Sort. For a list of random integers of size 10, their runtimes are relatively
similar, with Bubble Sort outpacing Merge Sort by ~0.00006s. This may be due to how Merge Sort splits and then
recombines the split portions of the list, while Bubble Sort performs its sorting in-place On the other hand, 
for a list of random integers of size 100,000, Merge Sort performs significantly better than Bubble Sort, 
beating it by almost 45s. 


### Conclusion

The algorithms I tested vary significantly in their performance ranges. For lists of smaller sizes, in-place sorting
algorithms seem to perform better, with Bubble Sort performing the best out of all of them. For lists of larger sizes,
algorithms that do not utilize in-place methods like Merge Sort are better equipped and perform significantly better.
Overall, Merge Sort is the most efficient algorithm as its runtime remains consistently lower than other algorithms for
the same list sizes.